Add image reconstruction example (#105)
GRAAL-Research/poutyne: docs/source/examples/Image_reconstruction.rst

.. role:: hidden
    :class: hidden-section

Image reconstruction using Poutyne
***********************************

.. note::

    - See the notebook `here <https://github.com/mohammad-brdrn/Image_reconstruction_with_Poutyne/blob/main/Image_reconstruction.ipynb>`_

>     - Run in `Google Colab <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1kUgmhtoCjZWZZ0uyZjy4NVW09E5krObZ/view?usp=sharing>`_

Reviewer: Should be a Google Colab link to the Github file as in the other examples.

.. image:: /_static/img/image_reconstruction/AE.png

Let's import all the needed packages.

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    import math
    import os
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    
    import torch
    import torch.nn as nn
    import torch.optim as optim
    from torch.utils.data import DataLoader, Subset, Dataset
    
    import torchvision
    import torchvision.datasets as datasets
    import torchvision.transforms as tfms
    from torchvision.utils import make_grid

    import poutyne
    from poutyne import set_seeds, Model, Experiment, ModelCheckpoint, CSVLogger

Training constants
==================

.. code-block:: python

    num_epochs = 3
    learning_rate = 0.001
    batch_size = 32
    image_size = 224
    valid_split_percent = 0.2
    momentum = 0.5
    device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
    print('The running processor is...', device)
    set_seeds(42)

Loading the MNIST dataset
=========================

> The MNIST dataset is directly downloaded from the `torchvision.datasets`. The training dataset contains 60,000 images of digits of size 28x28. However, we separate 20% of the full train dataset as a validation dataset. On the other hand, by setting the "train" argument to `False`, the test dataset containing 10,000 images is downloaded and saved in the "datasets" directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MNIST dataset is directly downloaded from the `torchvision.datasets`. The training dataset contains 60,000 images of digits of size 28x28. However, we separate 20% of the full train dataset as a validation dataset. On the other hand, by setting the "train" argument to `False`, the test dataset containing 10,000 images is downloaded and saved in the "datasets" directory.
```
```suggestion
The MNIST dataset is directly downloaded from the `torchvision.datasets` package. The training dataset contains 60,000 images of digits of size 28x28. However, we separate 20% of the full train dataset as a validation dataset. On the other hand, by setting the "train" argument to `False`, the test dataset containing 10,000 images is downloaded and saved in the "datasets" directory.
```

    
    train_dataloader = DataLoader(train_dataset_new, batch_size=batch_size, shuffle=True)
    valid_dataloader = DataLoader(valid_dataset_new, batch_size=batch_size, shuffle=False)
    test_dataloader = DataLoader(test_dataset_new, batch_size=1, shuffle=False)

Convolutional autoencoder
=========================

.. code-block:: python

    class ConvAutoencoder(nn.Module):
        def __init__(self):
            super(ConvAutoencoder, self).__init__()
          
            #encoder
            self.conv1 = nn.Conv2d(1, 32, 3, padding=1)  
            self.conv2 = nn.Conv2d(32, 4, 3, padding=1)
            self.pool = nn.MaxPool2d(2, 2)
          
            #decoder
            self.t_conv1 = nn.ConvTranspose2d(4, 32, 2, stride=2)
            self.t_conv2 = nn.ConvTranspose2d(32, 1, 2, stride=2)
    
        def forward(self, x):
            x = torch.relu(self.conv1(x))
            x = self.pool(x)
            x = torch.relu(self.conv2(x))
            x = self.pool(x)  # compressed representation
            x = torch.relu(self.t_conv1(x))
            x = torch.sigmoid(self.t_conv2(x))
                  
            return x
    
    network = ConvAutoencoder()
    

> In order to interact with the optimization process, `callbacks <https://poutyne.org/callbacks.html>`_ are defined and saved using the code below which saves the last weights, best weights and the logs, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to interact with the optimization process, `callbacks <https://poutyne.org/callbacks.html>`_ are defined and saved using the code below which saves the last weights, best weights and the logs, respectively.
```
```suggestion
In order to interact with the optimization process, `callbacks <https://poutyne.org/callbacks.html>`_ are defined and added to a list using the code below. They will save the last weights, best weights and the logs, respectively.
```

.. code-block:: python

>     #callbacks
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
No need for this comment

    save_path = 'saves'
    
    # Creating saving directory 
    os.makedirs(save_path, exist_ok=True)
    
    callbacks = [
        # Save the latest weights to be able to continue the optimization at the end for more epochs.
        ModelCheckpoint(os.path.join(save_path, 'last_weights.ckpt')),
    
        # Save the weights in a new file when the current model is better than all previous models.
        ModelCheckpoint(os.path.join(save_path, 'best_weight.ckpt'),
                        save_best_only=True, verbose=True),
    
        # Save the losses for each epoch in a TSV.
        CSVLogger(os.path.join(save_path, 'log.tsv'), separator='\t'),
    ]

.. code-block:: python

>     # specifying loss and optimization function

Reviewer: This comment should be part of the text.

    criterion = nn.MSELoss()
    optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(network.parameters(), lr=learning_rate)

Training
========

.. code-block:: python

    # Poutyne Model on GPU
    model = Model(network, optimizer, criterion, device=device)
    
    # Train
    model.fit_generator(train_dataloader, valid_dataloader, epochs=num_epochs, callbacks=callbacks)

A random batch of the MNIST dataset images
==========================================

> Let's see some of the input samples, inside the training dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see some of the input samples inside the training dataset.
```

.. code-block:: python

    inputs = next(iter(train_dataloader))[0]
    input_grid = make_grid(inputs)
    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10, 10))
    inp = input_grid.numpy().transpose((1, 2, 0))
    plt.imshow(inp)
    plt.show()

.. image:: /_static/img/image_reconstruction/mnist_batch.png

Reconstructed images after 3 epochs of training
===============================================

In order to visually evaluate the quality of the results, here, we show the reconstruction results of the samples shown above.

.. code-block:: python

    # Calculating predictions of the trained network on a batch
    outputs = torch.tensor(model.predict_on_batch(inputs))
    output_grid = make_grid(outputs)
    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10, 10))
    out = output_grid.numpy().transpose((1, 2, 0))
    plt.imshow(out)
    plt.show()

.. image:: /_static/img/image_reconstruction/mnist_3epoch.png

Evaluation
==========

One of the strong and useful tools in Poutyne is the evaluate methods, which not only provide you with the evaluation metrics but also provide the ground truths and the predictions if the related arguments have been set to True (as below).

.. code-block:: python

>     # evaluating thetrained network on test data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # evaluating the trained network on test data
```

In most computer vision applications, such as image reconstruction, it is very important to check the network's failures (or abilities, vice versa). The following part shows an input and a reconstructed image, as well as its reconstruction error map. The reconstruction error map shows which part of the image has not been reconstructed accurately.

.. code-block:: python

    sample_number = 2   # a sample from test dataset
    
    sample = ground_truth[sample_number][0]
    sample_prediction_result_3epochs = predictions[sample_number][0]
    
    recunstruction_error_map_3epochs = sample - sample_prediction_result_3epochs  #reconstruction error map
    fig, (ax1, ax2, ax3) = plt.subplots(1,3)
    ax1.imshow(sample)
    ax1.set_title('sample')
    
    ax2.imshow(sample_prediction_result_3epochs)
    ax2.set_title('prediction')
    
    ax3.imshow(np.abs(recunstruction_error_map_3epochs))
    ax3.set_title('reconstruction error')
    plt.show()

.. image:: /_static/img/image_reconstruction/rec_error_3epoch.png

Resuming the training for more epochs
=====================================

> If we find the past epochs not enough, Poutyne allows you to resume the training from the last done epoch, as below. Please note that, in the `callbacks` that we defined before, since we did not set the `restore_best argument` to `True`, our model stays at the last epoch after finishing the first part of the training. Hence, by setting the `initial_epoch` to the last epoch of the previous training, we can resume our training for more epoch, using the last saved weights. Otherwise, to benefit from the saved best weights, all you need is to set the `restore_best` argument to True and resume your training from the epoch number corresponding to the best weights saved by the callbacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we find the past epochs not enough, Poutyne allows you to resume the training from the last done epoch, as below. Please note that, in the `callbacks` that we defined before, since we did not set the `restore_best` argument in `ModelCheckpoint` to `True`, our model stays at the last epoch after finishing the first part of the training. Hence, by setting the `initial_epoch` to the last epoch of the previous training, we can resume our training for more epochs, using the last state of the neural network.
```

.. role:: hidden
    :class: hidden-section

.. _intro:

Image reconstruction using Poutyne
***********************************

.. note::

    - See the notebook `here <https://github.com/GRAAL-Research/poutyne/blob/master/examples/Image_reconstruction.ipynb>`_
    - Run in `Google Colab <https://colab.research.google.com/github/GRAAL-Research/poutyne/blob/master/examples/Image_reconstruction.ipynb>`_

> In this example, we train a simple convolutional autoencoder (Conv-AE) on the MNIST dataset to learn image reconstruction. The Conv-AE is composed of two parts: an encoder and a decoder. The encoder encodes the input images to extract compact image features. The decoder, on the other hand, decodes the extracted features, to reconstruct the input images.

Author: would you please make me more clear about this comment

**It seems that the build of the doc has warnings in it and that you did not add your page in the menu. Can you fix the warnings and include your page in the menu?**

Do you mean I add the link of my own git and collab?

**Finally, could you create a directory for your images with the name image_reconstruction instead of putting at the root of the img directory? I know we don't do that for the others but the directory will have too many images in it soon if we don't start now.**

Should I create this directory in the dev branch, inside the _static directory? and set the path to this directory? Do I have permission (in GitHub) to create the directory?

> In this example, we train a simple convolutional autoencoder (Conv-AE) on the MNIST dataset to learn image reconstruction. The Conv-AE is composed of two parts: an encoder and a decoder. The encoder encodes the input images to extract compact image features. The decoder, on the other hand, decodes the extracted features, to reconstruct the input images.

Reviewer: > Do you mean I add the link of my own git and collab?

In the docs directory, there is a script called `rebuild_html_doc.sh` which you can call via the command line in this way: `./rebuild_html_doc.sh`. This script builds the documentation (i.e. the website) in a subdirectory called `_build/html/`. You can then visualize the website by opening the `index.html` or by starting an HTTP server with Python: `python -m http.server --directory _build/html/` and go to the URL `http://localhost:8000/` afterwards. When I talk about menu, I'm talking about the menu on the website.

> Should I create this directory in the dev branch, inside the _static directory? and set the path to this directory? Do I have permission (in GitHub) to create the directory?

A directory in `_static/img/`. You can it inside the current branch. You don't need any permission since you are currently on your own Github repo.

.. image:: /_static/img/AE.png

Let's import all the needed packages.

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    import math
    import os
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    
    import torch
    import torch.nn as nn
    import torch.optim as optim
    from torch.utils.data import DataLoader, Subset, Dataset
    
    import torchvision
    import torchvision.datasets as datasets
    import torchvision.transforms as tfms
    from torchvision.utils import make_grid

    import poutyne
    from poutyne import set_seeds, Model, Experiment, ModelCheckpoint, CSVLogger

Training constants
==================================

.. code-block:: python

    num_epochs = 3
    learning_rate = 0.001
    batch_size = 32
    image_size = 224
    valid_split_percent = 0.2
    momentum = 0.5
    device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
    print('The running processor is...', device)

>     set_seeds(42)

Reviewer: Alright, then keep it that way.

.. code-block:: python

    #callbacks

    save_path = 'saves'
    
    # Creating saving directory 
    os.makedirs(save_path, exist_ok=True)
    
    callbacks = [
        # Save the latest weights to be able to continue the optimization at the end for more epochs.
        ModelCheckpoint(os.path.join(save_path, 'last_weights.ckpt')),
    
        # Save the weights in a new file when the current model is better than all previous models.
        ModelCheckpoint(os.path.join(save_path, 'best_weight.ckpt'),
                        save_best_only=True, restore_best=True, verbose=True),
    
        # Save the losses for each epoch in a TSV.
        CSVLogger(os.path.join(save_path, 'log.tsv'), separator='\t'),
    ]

.. code-block:: python

    # specifying loss and optimization function
    criterion = nn.MSELoss()
    optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(network.parameters(), lr=learning_rate)

Training
==================================

.. code-block:: python

    # Poutyne Model on GPU
    model = Model(network, optimizer, criterion, device=device)
    
    # Train

>     model.fit_generator(train_dataloader, valid_dataloader, epochs=num_epochs, callbacks=callbacks, progress_options={'coloring': False})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    model.fit_generator(train_dataloader, valid_dataloader, epochs=num_epochs, callbacks=callbacks)
```
No need to remove coloring.

In most computer vision applications, such as image reconstruction, it is very important to check the network's failures (or abilities, vice versa). The following part shows the input and the reconstructed images, as well as the reconstruction error map. Reconstruction error map shows which part of the image has not been reconstructed accurately.

.. code-block:: python

    sample_number = 2   # a sample from test dataset
    
    sample = ground_truth[sample_number][0]
    sample_prediction_result_3epochs = predictions[sample_number][0]
    
    recunstruction_error_map_3epochs = sample - sample_prediction_result_3epochs  #reconstruction error map
    fig, (ax1, ax2, ax3) = plt.subplots(1,3)
    ax1.imshow(sample)
    ax1.set_title('sample')
    
    ax2.imshow(sample_prediction_result_3epochs)
    ax2.set_title('prediction')
    
    ax3.imshow(np.abs(recunstruction_error_map_3epochs))
    ax3.set_title('reconstruction error')
    plt.show()

.. image:: /_static/img/rec_error_3epoch.png

Resuming the training for more epochs
==================================

> The code below shows how we can take advantage of Poutyne to resume training from a special epoch. For example, if we found the past epochs not enough, we can resume the training from the last done epoch, as below:

Reviewer: Poutyne does not allow you to resume from any epoch. The `initial_epoch` argument just allows you to set the first epoch of the optimization at some epoch. Thus, I propose to reformulate this section as follow.

```suggestion
If we find the past epochs not enough, Poutyne allows you to resume the training from the last done epoch, as below:
```

Reviewer: Also, since you used the `restore_best` argument in your ModelCheckpoint above, you need to load back the weights of the last epoch or else it will only continue your optimization from your best checkpoint. I think the best way would be to use the Experiment class instead of Model if you really want to show how to resume optimization with Poutyne.

    
.. code-block:: python    
    
    model.fit_generator(train_dataloader, valid_dataloader, epochs=13, callbacks=callbacks, initial_epoch=num_epochs)    

Reconstructed images after the second training process
==================================

> Now let's visualize the quality of results, after the second phase of training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's visualize the quality of the results after the second phase of training.
```

.. code-block:: python

    sample_number = 2 
    sample = ground_truth[sample_number][0]
    sample_prediction_result_13epochs = predictions[sample_number][0]
    recunstruction_error_map_13epochs = sample - sample_prediction_result_13epochs  #reconstruction error map
    
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(2, 3, sharex=True, sharey=True)
    axs[0, 0].imshow(sample)
    axs[0, 0].set_title('sample')
    
    axs[0, 1].imshow(sample_prediction_result_3epochs)
    axs[0, 1].set_title('prediction')
    
    axs[0, 2].imshow(np.abs(recunstruction_error_map_3epochs))
    axs[0, 2].set_title('rec_error epoch3')
    
    axs[1, 0].imshow(sample)
    axs[1, 0].set_title('sample')
    
    axs[1, 1].imshow(sample_prediction_result_13epochs)
    axs[1, 1].set_title('prediction')
    
    axs[1, 2].imshow(np.abs(recunstruction_error_map_13epochs))
    axs[1, 2].set_title('rec_error epoch13')
    
    plt.show()

.. image:: /_static/img/mnist_compare.png

You can also try more finetuning, by changing the hyperparameters (network capacity, epochs, etc) to increase the accuracy as much as you want.

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: Just one empty line at the end will suffice.
```suggestion

```
